# BiGAMi
Implementation of "Bi-Objective Genetic Algorithm Fitness Function for Feature Selection on Microbiome Datasets".

## Extended Abstract

**Background:** The microbiome is defined as the assemblage of microorganism (including bacteria, archaea, fungi, and viruses) present in the host’s environment (e.g. human body), which differs based on habitat (e.g. skin, mouth, gut) and host's diet, and undergoes major changes throughout the host's lifetime. The high dimensionality of microbiome datasets has often been addressed as a major difficulty for data analysis, such as the use of Machine Learning (ML) and Deep Learning (DL) models. To this end, we evaluated and determined the effectiveness of using a bi-objective Genetic Algorithm (GA) fitness function that merges the actual classification performance and the chromosome size of a GA individual into a single metric to select subsets of highly predictive features (bacterial OTUs) on 4 different microbiome datasets for disease or host condition classification (Colorectal Cancer, Bacterial Vaginosis, Vagina Black/White, Liver Cirrhosis). 

**Results:** Here we present BiGAMi, a bi-objective genetic algorithm fitness function for feature selection in microbial datasets to train high-performing phenotype classifiers. The proposed fitness function allowed us to build classifiers that outperformed the baseline performance estimated by the original studies by using as few as 0.04% to 2.32% of the original dataset. Where classifiers without a feature selection already achieved almost perfect results, the proposed method performed 'on par'. In 19 out of 21 classification exercises defined by the classification task and the associated data transformations, BiGAMi achieved its results by selecting 6-68% fewer features than the highest performance of a Sequential Forward Feature Selection algorithm. The results of this study also highlight that working with absolute, relative, or centered-log ratio (CLR) microbe abundance counts had only a minor effect on classification performance per task. However, the use of the CLR data transformation consistently achieved its results by selecting smaller OTU subsets. The BiGAMi implementation can be found on GitHub (https://github.com/mikeleske/BiGAMi). 

**Conclusions:** Selecting the most important microbes for predicting a host condition inherently contributes to building more explainable and interpretable prediction results. This study showed that the application of a bi-objective GA fitness function against microbiome datasets to classify well-understood diseases or host conditions succeeded in selecting small subsets of bacteria whose contribution to the host state was already experimentally proven. Applying this feature selection approach to novel diseases is expected to quickly reveal the microbes most relevant to such a disease.
